the press briefing good afternoon and
welcome to Downing Street for today's
coronavirus press briefing I'm joined by
our national medical director for the
NHS professor Steve Powis and professor
of public health and epidemiology at
Manchester Professor John Newton our
step-by-step action plan is aiming to
slow the spread of the virus so fewer
people need hospital treatment at any
one time protecting the NHS is ability
to cope at each point we've been
following scientific and medical advice
and we've been deliberate in our actions
taking the right steps at the right time
we're also taking unprecedented action
to increase NHS capacity by dramatically
expanding the numbers of beds of key
staff and life-saving equipment to the
frontline to give people the care they
need when they need it most I've been
away for a week now and I'm delighted to
be back in the past week we've completed
the construction of a whole new hospital
the NHS Nightingale Hospital in London
built in nine days with 4,000 beds this
is the equivalent of 10 district general
hospitals and there's more to come in
Birmingham Manchester and Glasgow where
the military have been working wonders
in helping to construct this has been an
incredible achievement and I want to
thank everybody involved I also want to
thank everyone who has followed the
social distancing guidelines and the
admirable fortitude and spirit of the
British people in following these rules
and Steve will update us on the progress
that's being made and how people are
following those rules and I want to pay
a huge tribute to to all of the councils
the primary care community care
pharmacies and unbelievable 750,000
volunteers who've signed up for
shielding the most vulnerable this is
Britain at its
sadly the coronavirus continues to grow
I can report that through the
government's ongoing monitoring and
testing program that according to the
latest figures a hundred and sixty three
thousand 194 people have now been tested
for the virus three thirty three
thousand seven hundred and eighteen have
tested positive and the best scientific
analysis is that the rate of infection
has been doubling every three to four
days the number of people admitted to
hospital with coronavirus symptoms is
now twelve thousand nine hundred and
forty nine of those who've contracted
the virus 2921 have sadly died we
express our deepest condolences to the
families and to the Friends of the
victims if the past few weeks have shown
us anything it's that we are steadfast
as a country in our resolve to defeat
this invisible killer I'm profoundly
moved by the compassion and the
commitment that we're saying from people
right across the country and in the
health and care system we've lost
colleagues to doctors nurses mental
health professionals they have paid the
ultimate price for their service working
to care for others and I just want to
say this on behalf of all my colleagues
in health and social care I am awed by
the dedication of colleagues on the
front line every single person who
contributes to the running of this
diverse and caring institution that our
nation holds so dear many of those who
have died who are from the NHS were
people who came to this country to make
a difference and they did and they've
given their lives in sacrifice and we
salute them and I tell you this I come
back redoubled in my determination to
fight this virus with everything I've
got and we will strain every sinew to
defeat it once and for all
and I'll stop at nothing to make sure
that frontline staff have the right
and so that they're safe and can have
the confidence they need to do their
jobs and I know that people have been
asking questions about protective
equipment with the support of the
British military we've shipped a record
quantity of equipment to the frontline
just yesterday forty five million pieces
of protective equipment were delivered
across Health and Social Care including
more than 5 million aprons and six
million surgical masks today public
health England have announced the
upgraded PPE standards that people
should use and expect the upgraded
guidance has been developed through
intense consultation with stakeholders
right across the board and staff on the
frontline
we have listened we've put the interests
of health and care staff first and put
them at the heart of this the new
guidance recommends the appropriate
level of PPE to protect people in all
circumstances these standards are
amongst the highest in the world and in
line with the recommendations of the
World Health Organization
I'm delighted they've been welcomed by
the medical Royal Colleges the BMA the
Royal College of nurses and the trade
unions any health or care organization
that needs PPE
should call the hotline so that our
military operation for delivering PPE
can get that protective equipment to you
these are unprecedented times for our
health and care system and I want to
make sure that every part every part of
it is supported I've therefore made 300
million pounds available for funding for
community pharmacies who do so much to
get vital medicines to people and say
place such an important part in their
communities they themselves are the NHS
frontline and today to help NHS trusts
to deliver what's needed without
worrying about past finances I can
announce that I'm writing off thirteen
point four billion pounds of historic
NHS debt this landmark step will not
only put the NHS in a stronger position
to be able to respond to this global
coronavirus pandemic but it will ensure
NHS has stronger foundations for the
future too but this is only one part of
the picture I quite understand to why
people are yearning for the certainty
that good testing provides I get it
public health England can be incredibly
proud of the world beating work they've
done so far on testing the rollout of
public health England's kovat 19
diagnostic test is the fastest
deployment of a novel test in recent
history including faster than the swine
flu pandemic in 2009 but I'm going to
level with you about the challenges that
we face and the plan we have to rise to
those challenges I'm going to go through
some of the challenges in very specific
detail and then talk about the plan we
have to drive this forward with a
significant increase in testing first of
all unlike some countries we didn't go
into this crisis with a huge Diagnostics
industry we have the best scientific
labs in the world but we did not have
the scale my German counterpart for
instance could call upon a hundred test
labs ready and waiting when the crisis
struck thanks in large part to rush one
of the biggest diagnostic companies in
the world we have had to build from a
lower base next there's the demand for
materials there's been a shortage of
both swabs and reagents thanks to the
ingenuity of my team we have fixed the
swabs issue and we're tackling the
shortage of reagents we're resolving
this reagents issue but as the head of
rush and the President of the United
States have commented this is a global
challenge I'm sure that we'll get there
next there's the challenge of
prioritization look I understand why NHS
staff want tests so they can get back to
the frontline of course I do but I took
the decision that the first priority has
to be the patient
for whom the result of a test could be
the difference in treatment that is the
difference between life and death
I believe anybody in my shoes would have
taken the same decision I'm proud that
every single patient who's needed a test
for life-saving treatment has had access
to a test but of course NHS staff need
access to testing too and I'm delighted
that the weekend we could roll out this
access for the first time and there's a
challenge to of making sure that the
public can have confidence in tests
several of the tests that we're
currently checking have failed in one
case a test that I'm being urged to by
missed three out of four positive cases
of coronavirus that means in
three-quarters of cases that test would
have given the false comfort of sending
someone with coronavirus back on the
wards approving tests that don't work is
dangerous and I will not do it now these
are some of the challenges that we've
faced but I want to set out my plan to
boost testing let's first be clear about
the goal always to ensure that testing
is available to patients who need it
next to expand testing to critical NHS
staff and their families and I can
announce today that we're expanding
testing for NHS staff further third as
we ramp up the numbers will test
critical key workers and over time we'll
expand testing to the community our
ultimate goal is that anyone who needs a
test should have one now let me take a
moment to set out my five pillar testing
strategy to achieve these goals the
first pillar is swab testing in public
health England labs and within the NHS
in their hospitals this is the testing
to find out if you currently have the
virus we've already reached a target of
10,000 tests per day precisely on time
by the end of March as committed and
we're committed to reaching 25,000 tests
per day by the N
of April at the latest because it allows
the NHS to identify and effectively care
for those who are most seriously ill
saving lives by helping clinicians
decide the most effective treatment
options I can reassure you that every
single patient who needs a test is able
to have one and this is how we're going
to make sure that people with the get
the right treatment in hospitals the
second pillar is the creation of a brand
new swab testing capacity delivered by
commercial partners again this is swab
testing to tell if people have the virus
the biggest part of pillar 2 is
partnerships with universities research
institutes and companies like Amazon and
Boots to build from scratch a network of
new labs and testing sites across the
country this brand new service has just
launched and is ramping up rapidly the
trials of this have successfully
completed and the number of tests at
this facility
will significantly increase from this
weekend to begin with this capacity will
be used solely for frontline NHS staff
and their families increasing testing
capacity for NHS staff will allow more
doctors and nurses who do not have the
disease safely to go back to work and to
treat those who are most in need of care
there are these are currently in the
final stages of development as of now
over 5,000 NHS workers have been tested
across the five new testing sites and
these testing capabilities currently
there are only five point seven percent
of doctors absent due to covert 19 but
of course we want to get that number
down and we're working with other
testing companies to expand piller to so
over time we have many different
commercial partners delivering mass swab
testing the third pillar is blood tests
now blood tests are designed to tell
whether people have had the virus and
are now immune these tests are done by
taking a blood sample and looking for
the presence of the right code with 19
antibodies these could be potentially be
done at home with a finger prick and
deliver results in as little as twenty
minutes
we're currently working with nine
companies who've offered these tests and
evaluating their effectiveness these
antibody test blood tests offer the hope
that people who think they've had the
disease will know they're immune and can
get back to life as much as possible as
normal but they've got to work the
fourth pillar is surveillance we're
conducting some of the biggest surveys
in the world to find out what proportion
of the population already have the virus
this is done using a highly an ultra
high accuracy antibody test operated by
public health England at their Portland
down science campus we have capacity for
three thousand five hundred of these
tests a week enough of population
sampling to begin with robust population
surveillance programs are essential to
understanding the rate of infection and
how the virus is spreading across the
country will use these tests to help us
strengthen our scientific understanding
and inform us on the big choices that we
have to make about social distancing and
how we exit from this crisis we did not
start this crisis with a large
Diagnostics industry but that doesn't
mean that we can't build one just as our
top end manufacturers have joined up the
national effort to build ventilators so
the pharmaceutical companies will do the
same for testing our pharmaceutical
giants like Astra Zeneca and GSK which
have no great history in Diagnostics are
now working with our world-leading but
small diagnostics companies to build a
British Diagnostics industry at scale
the new national effort for testing will
ensure that we can get tests for
everyone who needs them and I'm
delighted that the pharmaceutical
industry is rising to this challenge and
putting unprecedented resources into
testing taken together I am now setting
the goal of 100,000 tests per day by the
end of this month that is the goal and I
am determined that we will get there and
to help drive this work forward I'm
pleased that professor John Newton from
public health England will be taking
on a new role to coordinate this
national effort for testing working with
my brilliant departmental officials the
NHS and the life sciences industry
professor Newton is widely recognized as
a leading voice on public health and
epidemiology and I'm thrilled that we
can bring to bear his considerable
experience on this vital issue my five
pillars represent a comprehensive plan
to put in place the testing that is
mission critical as we fight this battle
against coronavirus there will be
problems like many of those that we've
already overcome after all building a
brand new industry it's not easy
there will be bumps in the road and
criticisms made and some of them will be
justified and I returned from illness
more determined than ever to fight this
disease will bring together the best
minds will bring together the best
science that this country has to offer
and will work with our friends and
allies from around the world as we do so
because we are in the midst of a war
against an invisible enemy and it is a
war in which all of humanity is on the
same side and history's shown that when
the world unites against a common foe
then we will prevail
as the Prime Minister said yesterday
mass testing is how we unlock the
coronavirus puzzle and defeat it in the
end but in the meantime while the
disease is still spreading and the
government builds up its ability to test
at mass scale the most important thing
for people to do is to stay at home to
protect the NHS and to save lives now we
I'm going to turn to Steve Powis who's
going to set out some of the details of
where we're up to in our fight against
coronavirus Steve thank you Matt so I'd
like to update you with some of the
information that we have been collecting
that tells us how we are doing in our
efforts to combat this virus as the
Secretary of State has outlined you will
be familiar with some of these charts we
have shown them before but they are
updated to show you the current position
so as everybody knows the key thing in
battling this virus is to reduce our
contact with others social distancing
and by doing that we reduce the chance
that the virus is transmitted from one
person to another we reduce the spread
of the virus and if we do that
successfully then the number of cases
start to reduce so this first chart
gives an update on how we're doing as a
nation in reducing that social contact
and this as we said before takes
information from our transport services
although we do have data from many other
areas of life which shows very similar
data and this shows that we continue to
see a large reduction in the usage of
public transport which is a good thing
and reflects the the compliance that we
all have with the instructions we've
been giving being given Motor Vehicle
unfortunately a motor vehicle usage went
up a couple of days ago but it's not
gone up any further and personally I
would like to see that come down a bit
more in the next slide we begin to show
how that translates into infections and
hospital admissions now as I and others
have said previously it will take some
weeks for all the efforts that we are
making to reap benefit and to start to
translate into a reduction in infections
and a reduction in hospitalizations and
so you can see that we are still seeing
an increase in infections although I
think it's important to say as I've said
before not to take any single day and to
look at a trend over time in the next
slide this shows how it's translating
into hospital admissions again it's
worth pointing out that London is ahead
of the rest of the country and I've seen
more pressure but you will also see that
other areas in the country and that
country are now seeing pressure such as
the Midlands you'll also see though that
this curve or this line is not getting
steeper and steeper
as time goes on and that is a good thing
because it means that there is a
constant level of increase and there is
some indication that going forward we
might start to see it flatten off but as
I've said this will take a week or two
because there is a lag period between
getting an infection and being
hospitalized a week or ten days later
and then finally of course that
translates unfortunately and with great
sadness into deaths and we are still
seeing the number of deaths increase and
as I've said unfortunately I think that
will be that continue to be the case we
will still see those higher number of
deaths for a few weeks yet until the
benefit of all the actions that
everybody in the country is taking will
start to bear fruit and will start to
impact into a reduction in deaths thanks
Steve so if we now go to go to questions
the first question from Laura Koons Berg
at BBC and you've just announced a big
new target for the end of the month but
can I be a clear that that would be of
all kinds of tests so the antibody tests
as well as the test to see if people
have got the disease right now can you
give us a firm date by when any NHS
staff that needs a tests will get a test
because in a fast-moving crisis like
this the end of the month is still a
long time away yes
thanks Laura the new goal of a hundred
thousand tests a day by the end of this
month is over all five pillars now if
one of the large scale antibody tests
that we're working on and testing comes
good then of course that will be great
news but we will not as I said in my
remarks we will not be allowing one of
those to proceed until we are confident
that it is a good test because no test
is better than a bad test and so the
hundred thousand a day is across all
five pillars and I am I'm I'm calling on
the life sciences industry their
universities
and of course the public agencies that
report to me the NHS and public health
England to unite together to meet that
goal you asked about testing of NHS
staff now this is incredibly important
as I said I'm delighted that we've now
managed to test 5000 NHS staff and I'm
also delighted that the absence figures
the number of people who aren't at work
in the NHS due to coronavirus is lower
than and then had been previously
reported and I will over the coming
weeks seek to ensure that every NHS
frontline staff member who needs a test
gets one and crucially their families
because sometimes some NHS staff have to
stay at home because of their following
the rules on household isolation if one
of their family gets the test
I protect the next prioritization is of
course NHS staff working in critical
care and then after that we we we will
spread the availability of tests across
the NHS and social care and then other
key workers and then over time to the to
the population as a whole
I don't know if John you want to add
something on testing you know thank you
secular state well the the initial
priority of course is for the swab tests
because those are the tests which allow
the NHS to manage critically ill
patients to the best they possibly can
and also to allow NHS staff and other
key workers to come back to work when
they can the antibody tests are ideally
done 28 days after an infection so in
fact the requirement for the antibody
test isn't really with us yet so the the
urgent priority both types of tests are
important both are urgent but the most
urgent is the swab tests so that we can
treat patients better and get start back
to work fantastic do you want to come
back on that Laura or I think I just
secretary of state we asked if there was
a firm date that you could give NHS
staff you need tests you just said over
the coming weeks yes would you put a
date on that would you give it a
deadline because people are very worried
about this right now well they are and
I'm glad that we were able to speed it
up it will absolutely be before the end
of the month but we are and I'm saying
over the over the coming weeks with 5000
tested since this started at the weekend
we've clearly made we've made
significant progress and I'm really glad
that the figures of those in the NHS who
are absent due to coronavirus are lower
than had been previously reported but we
will get there as soon as we can and I'm
absolutely determined to make
commitments that we can meet rather than
to over promise and that's one of the
reasons I've set out some of the
difficulties and the challenges that
we're that we're facing which we're
trying to overcome in testing probably
also important to emphasize from the NHS
perspective the staff that we most want
to test and this is what has been
reflected back to us from NHS
organisations too so of course as
psychics nadir said that staff in key
areas such as critical care are very
important but it's the staff at home who
are in household quarantine they are
well but a member of the family is
unwell those are the staff that we want
to prioritize first and of course as
you've heard that involves testing that
personally in the household
who's unwell not the member of staff
there are staff of course who are self
isolating because they are symptomatic
they're important too but of course if
they're unwell actually what we want to
make sure is that they get better we
have a duty of care to our own staff
than if they're at home sick then it's
really important that they get better
before they come back to work thanks
very much next question from Robert
Peston ITV professor Paris I think you
talk comparatively recently about green
shoots but if we look at the charts that
you've presented today you've got a
logarithmic scale for deaths deaths
rising in a straight line still out of
control we've had a big leap in
reportage new cases and have those green
shoots vanished and then secondly Oh
a lot of attention has been paid to the
shortage of protective equipment PPE
gear for medical and frontline staff
which the secretary state has talked
about how you're trying to correct but
lots of hospitals are reporting unease
that they may run out of oxygen
sedatives and ascetic what system do you
have in place to make sure the other
absolutely vital consumables as I
understand you call them don't run out
well if I answer the the second part of
my question they've passed over for the
for the first we have a very detailed
plan for making sure that we have the
full supply of medicines including ones
that you mentioned sedatives and all the
medicines needed for those who have
covered 19 and people being ventilated
and we'd probably have one of the
strongest understandings of the supply
chain of anywhere in the world because
of the preparations we did for a No Deal
brexit and we keep them constantly under
review in fact I took a meeting on this
question today so whilst we of course
with the lockdowns around the world we
we are highly vigilant we are currently
confident that we have the supplies of
medicines that are needed so so no I
still think there are reasons to be
hopeful as I said a couple of days ago
one of the very first reasons for that
is because we do see as I have shown you
that the public is complying with the
measures that that the government have
laid out to reduce social contact and to
stop the spread of the transmission if
we didn't see that happening then I
think the answer would be no but we do
see that happening and it's important we
continue to see that happening secondly
as symmetric valence said earlier in the
week we we do see early academic
evidence that the transmission rate in
the community may have fallen below one
and that's important because if if it's
the case that we are no longer passing
the virus on
to multiple people so to lesson one
person for everybody who's infected then
that is additional evidence that
infections are going to reduce but as
I've said before and as I said a few
minutes ago it does take time for that
to translate into changes in
hospitalization infection rates
hospitalization and death so it is still
too early yes
reasons to be hopeful but reasons not to
be complacent and reasons to continue
for everybody to comply with those
measures just in case you didn't know
stay at home protect the NHS and save
lives still absolutely vital core
messages I think you're trying to come
back Robert it was just I mean obviously
it would be incredibly encouraging if
the rate of transmission the are as you
call it is below one but how do we know
what some evidence are we gathering that
gives us that kind of information and
perhaps confidence Steve so it's
possible to gather that some of the
information by looking at the way that
people interact with each other so it is
possible from a modeling perspective to
make assumptions based on the amount of
contact that we can see is going on with
each other it is absolutely the case
that to be sure of that the sort of
studies in the community that the
secretary State is highlighted will will
confirm that which is why there's
reasons to be optimistic about it but
not reasons to be absolutely certain
about it and that's exactly why I say
that it's too early to tell yet but the
good news is that people are complying
we're staying at home with avoiding
contact and some of our very very early
evidence is that that should start to
translate through to fewer
hospitalizations less pressure on the
NHS and fewer deaths thanks very much
Victoria McDonald at channel 4 hi
thank you mr. Hancock and welcome back I
just wanted to ask a question about you
yourself were tested for covered 19 and
I wondered under which criteria you were
tested and given that the general public
is still some way away from having their
own tests you say a hundred thousand a
day by the
end of the month but that's not a
hundred thousand people because of all
the false negatives so can you just tell
us why you got the okay we're going to
leave that turn number ten news briefing
the six o'clock news with all the day's
developments on the corona virus
pandemic is coming up
[Music]
you